content/project/datashift/index.md, before:

---
title: "Learning Limited: How limited data sharing impacts machine learning performance in health"
summary: This study finds that machine learning models trained on pooled electronic health record (EHR) data from multiple sites can generalize better to unseen data, while also revealing that data sharing partnerships may not always enhance performance, and certain baseline models continue to be competitive except in few-shot learning scenarios.


tags:
  - Time Series
  - Ongoing
date: '2023-04-19T00:00:00Z'

# Optional external URL for project (replaces project detail page).
external_link: ''

image:
  caption: Photo by rawpixel on Unsplash
  focal_point: Smart

links:
  # - icon: twitter
  #   icon_pack: fab
  #   name: Follow
  #   url: https://twitter.com/georgecushen
url_code: ''
url_pdf: ''
url_slides: ''
url_video: ''

# Slides (optional).
#   Associate this project with Markdown slides.
#   Simply enter your slide deck's filename without extension.
#   E.g. `slides = "example-slides"` references `content/slides/example-slides.md`.
#   Otherwise, set `slides = ""`.
# slides: example
---

In this study, we introduce advanced solutions to the 2023 MEDIQA-Chat challenge, focusing on the automated generation of clinical notes from physician-patient dialogues. Our models achieved first place in both Task A and Task B, which involved generating individual note excerpts and complete notes, respectively. We employed state-of-the-art large-language-model (LLM) based approaches, including fine-tuning FLAN-T5-Large, Longformer Encoder-Decoder (LED), and In-Context Learning (ICL) with GPT-4, and explored zero-shot/few-shot learning and prompt engineering techniques to enhance our solutions. In Task A, our fine-tuned FLAN-T5-Large model demonstrated competitive performance, achieving a header accuracy of 0.78, Rouge1 score of 0.4466, Rouge2 score of 0.2282, Bertscore F1 score of 0.7303, Bleurt score of 0.5593, and an aggregate score of 0.5789, outperforming the second and third place teams with aggregate scores of 0.5739 and 0.5622, respectively, achieving first place among 31 entries. In Task B, both our GPT-4+ICL approach and the fine-tuned LED approach consistently ranked higher than all other 19 entries in the MEDIQA-Chat2023 competition, with our GPT-4+ICL approach achieving the highest aggregate scores across all sections, and an average section score of 0.6483. These results demonstrate the potential of our methods in contributing to the development of automated tools that assist healthcare professionals in generating accurate clinical notes and enhancing patient engagement. The findings of this study hold implications for the future of natural language processing and machine learning applications in the healthcare domain, and indicate the promise of large-language-models in improving the documentation and communication of patient information by medical professionals.

Commit message:

fix a typo and added news date

content/project/datashift/index.md, after:

---
title: "Learning Limited: How limited data sharing impacts machine learning performance in health"
summary: This study finds that machine learning models trained on pooled electronic health record (EHR) data from multiple sites can generalize better to unseen data, while also revealing that data sharing partnerships may not always enhance performance, and certain baseline models continue to be competitive except in few-shot learning scenarios.


tags:
  - Time Series
  - Ongoing
date: '2023-04-19T00:00:00Z'

# Optional external URL for project (replaces project detail page).
external_link: ''

image:
  caption: Photo by rawpixel on Unsplash
  focal_point: Smart

links:
  # - icon: twitter
  #   icon_pack: fab
  #   name: Follow
  #   url: https://twitter.com/georgecushen
url_code: ''
url_pdf: ''
url_slides: ''
url_video: ''

# Slides (optional).
#   Associate this project with Markdown slides.
#   Simply enter your slide deck's filename without extension.
#   E.g. `slides = "example-slides"` references `content/slides/example-slides.md`.
#   Otherwise, set `slides = ""`.
# slides: example
---

Electronic health records (EHR) are filled with sensitive information, such as comorbidities and prescriptions, that can be leveraged by machine learning to improve patient care. However, limitations on data sharing have relegated the machine learning for health community to develop models on private local data, or a handful of publicly released datasets. Therefore, the portability of machine learning training approaches across several EHRs has yet to be thoroughly explored. To fill this gap, we illustrate model performance in situations in which EHRs may be shared.

In a broad set of experiments, we find that models trained across data pooled from several sites can indeed generalise to unseen in-domain data better than single domain training, regardless of their encoding. Pooled learning with local encoders, having data from all sources available simultaneously at training time, has the added benefit that the uniquely structured EHRs do not need to be mapped to an interoperable format when site-specific encoders are learned in a supervised fashion.

Further, if institutions seek to form data sharing partnerships instead of housing their data in shared data repositories, they may find less benefit. We also find that roughly a quarter of the data partnerships formed are not helpful to either site for classification performance, while half of them are beneficial to both sites. Interestingly, a quarter of them are only unilaterally helpful and site similarity alone does not imply transferability. The beneficial relationships were not observed for large supervised dataset classification tasks, however.

Additionally, when EHRs are mapped to a common format, zero-shot models fail to reach fully-labelled single-institution performance. In this case, fine-tuning can exceed single-institution performance with substantially fewer patients. Baseline models like XGBoost remained competitive, except for in the few-shot learning challenge; Even when none of the positive labels are in the fine-tuning samples neural architectures see consistent improvements over zero-shot models.
